hello and welcome I'm joined today by my
colleague Ben fulan who has spent the
last few weeks reporting from Israel Ben
welcome um let's jump right into it
you're reporting from the country about
a month after the October 7th attacks I
would imagine this is a time in which
some of the sheer shock of those attacks
has perhaps dissipated a little bit um
but obviously the disruption to lives
and livelihoods a lot remains unclear
how would you describe uh your
perception of that time I would actually
say it's a nation still in shock even a
month on um that's all people were
talking about uh a lot of grave faces
not the generous uh welcoming Israelis
that you're used to uh but rather an
economy a people under attack really um
the economy is going to take a huge hit
uh especially the tech sector the tech
sector makes up uh a fifth of the
economy a half of the country's exports
and a third of tax revenues you've got a
heap of people working for the sector
and uh that alone has got to got get to
get the diversification alarm bells
ringing um but sentiment had already
been dropping before the war there'd
been a sharp drop in investment because
of the government's divisive judicial
reforms that's right and uh also a
global slowdown a survey of 500 startups
though highlighted two big points uh
just two weeks into the war a lack of
Manpower whole lot of reservists 3
60,000 of them being called up and a
drop in investment uh for many startups
in their initial phases so it's not
boting well for the
sector this Tech sector you filmed a
piece there we want to take a look at it
in just a moment maybe you can give us
some context about uh your decision to
film and and uh anything else you want
to add before we look at it uh well
basically what I wanted to point out is
that um there are some upsides here
there is a global Coalition of tech
companies and entrepreneurs that have
banded together and they're providing a
$100 million fund not as huge as some of
the sums we're used to throwing about in
the tech sector in Israel but certainly
a little bit of hope uh from a senior
Microsoft official in Israel uh a very
pessimistic tone he's saying that is
warning that multinational companies May
close research and development centers
and that the country uh really needs to
create some sort of positive Horizon in
his words uh to convince that
multinationals need to keep growing need
to keep investing is in Israel um he
noted that for every Tech job there are
five more created in the Israeli economy
and uh there's a great danger that
Israel uh could return to selling
oranges and being a third world economy
in his words okay let's go ahead and
take a look at that
piece it can be Lonely at the Top oi
Glick heads a sustainability platform
that services companies worldwide her
Tel Aviv headquarters are eerily quiet
with Israel at War about 70% of the team
members are either drafted or supporting
the effort which we are actually
encouraging their it knoow means some
employees are key to military operations
but what about their jobs Israelis are
very agile and very resilient so they
work during the day and work with us
during the night so our business uh
thankfully um is not affected but even
if companies are managing for now a
country at War could be unsettling for
international investors crucial to
Israel's high-tech sector around 400
multinationals are set up in Israel all
the big names the largest foreign
employer of local Engineers is Intel the
company is planning a $25 billion chip
manufacturing plant will it still happen
I'm sure they're very committed to
Israel I'm sure they will continue to
support Israel and I I don't think it
will impact their long-term Strategic
investment in Israel but the war could
drag
on the Chief Operating Officer of the
startup is also off to the
front he says they're doing okay as a
company during this important mission to
protect our country we need to make sure
that ESG go is Contin to exist and this
is what we are
managing uh we have a great employees in
the company that understand the
situation the challenges challenges of
the situation to make sure that they are
in service but in the meantime taking
care of the
company one last strategy meeting then
yif is off to war oy back to
business all right let's get more from
Ben fulan who filmed that report the
head of that startup saying that some
70% of her employees were either drafted
or supporting that effort can we say if
that's typical for what we're seeing in
this Branch I imagine it's a very young
branch in general it is um that's an
extreme case um in other companies it's
about half but that's you know still a
huge number and for workers to be
operating on the front and working
nights for their companies I mean how
long can you go on doing that I asked
oy that and she said oh yeah you know we
can keep that up for months but this
might go on for a year we we've been
talking about the tech sector what about
other parts of the Israeli economy when
we look at um you know the resources
being pulled for this draft for this
mobilization what can we say when I was
there I was one of the only ones in my
hotel There Were Soldiers there people
being
relocated uh evacuees from um
communities close to
Gaza and uh and that was about it it and
on the streets a whole lot of soldiers a
whole lot of police uh a lot of people
carrying weapons and uh otherwise a real
real hit to sentiment um hit to the mood
and um it's just an unfortunate time for
me to go to the country of course isn't
it the head of um that company who you
interviewed there she seemed generally
AC accepting of the situation as we
talked about this was only a month after
those attacks um do you have a sense if
that is IAL right now is this a common
sentiment that you hear definitely her
son is also off to the front uh her Co
O's son is a
paratrooper uh I met two families of
soldiers one working in international
Liaisons and uh she's on the northern
border to
Lebanon um and another family an
American uh Israeli whose son is in Gaza
and has been there since day one so she
she basically hasn't really heard from
him in a month this is essentially an
economy right now in which a lot of
people aren't showing up I would imagine
in the same degree that they were before
and that there there seems to be an
acceptance of that given the situation
fair to say yeah people are holding out
um others I've spoken to devastated they
don't know what to do big question marks
lots of uncertainty and as you know
uncertainty
drives uh the bad vibes on
exchanges uh Ben we want to show another
piece from your reporting that looks at
the livelihoods um that continues to
look at how livelihoods are affected by
this war this one looking in particular
at the tourism Branch um maybe you can
give us some context for the piece um
sure I went to Jerusalem's old city um
that's the occupied uh East and there
are lots of um mainly Arab traders there
who are really worried about their
families in Gaza worried about bigger
things than just their own livelihoods
but yeah zero tourist s and usually when
um a conflict hits um you know tourism
takes a hit but not to this extent all
right let's have a look at the
piece a once in a-lifetime trip for many
cut short by War Jerusalem's old city is
one of the holiest places in the world
for an array of religions and
communities it's usually full of
pilgrims and tourists not
today the typically bustling Suk of East
Jerusalem is e quiet after October 7th
tourists left the country in a hurry
bookings were
cancelled of the 800 Merchants mostly
Arabs only a handful are here they say
this will hurt business for months if
not years every two years 3 years we
have a new round of violence that can
you know stop or not reduce the amount
of tourist but this one stopped it
completely and this one seems to be the
roughest round we I have ever seen from
peak season to nothing there is no work
I'm just coming to sit business no we
feel sad you know we don't have work at
all the situation is not easy it's uh
the war is not easy no no no we feel
very upset and sad and no nobody feel
good you know not from no Arabs no Jew
nobody feel good we feel all
de the stairs to the Church of the Holy
Seiler this has been the pilgrimage site
for Christians since the 4th Century
today it's devoid of the usual tour
groups no people are very afraid and
disappointed and they don't want even to
want to hear about religion you
know because they say like this things
is taking us
to a dark
days with no no end to the conflict in
sight there is a lot to pray for right
now well Ben fulan filmed that piece and
he's here with me now Ben we know that
there's a lot more going on um than just
the economy obviously in this conflict
lives lost through the attack lives
being lost right now through these
operations at the same time this is
about livelihoods um give us a sense of
how important tourism is in this case to
many livelihoods across this region uh
tourism basically your tourism related
jobs make up 6% of total employment it's
a huge sector it's one of their key uh
income sources and uh we're talking
about 2 and a half million tourists who
visited including pilgrims um up until
the war and they were expecting another
2 and a half million in this next period
and the war hit right at peak season and
none of those are going to be coming
what does this mean for those uh who are
basically seeing their income evaporate
um through this slck of TRS they're
really uh bewildered they just don't
know what to do they're turning up to
like one of the guys in that report to
air out his carpets and chase away moths
that's all he does um others have moved
online during uh Corona time so uh
they're really cashing in on that side
of things and that makes up for a lot of
sales but what they're missing is that
huge uh tourist crowd that comes uh
right throughout the year
actually again sort of wrapping this up
and taking a step back we know that the
the economy in Israel is just one part
of this broader story uh at the same
time this really is about livelihoods um
how much of an issue is it for Israel
when we look at their economy compared
to where they are right now and what's
going on is this something that you're
seeing being talked about what it can
sustain we mentioned um the the
investment from outside you mentioned
the the Microsoft analyst and his
thoughts on it um what do we here within
the country there are some saying that
investors will return but the question
is when you know is it going to take a
year for them to come back just for
these tourists to come back they're
saying it's going to take if the war
stops tomorrow it'll take another six
months um as far as the big investors go
um it's said that they may out of
solidarity suddenly increase uh you've
got a lot of countries behind Israel
around the world um but hotels
Hospitality cafes bakeries restaurants
they're empty and they're going to take
massive hits um the only sector bucking
the trend is the gun trade because
there's a lot of distrust at the moment
and people are hiring bodyguards uh
people are buying weapons there was a
politician court giving out free weapons
which the US wasn't happy about because
they were sponsored by the US um it's
it's a really tricky situation right now
no one's happy and uh no one feels safe
all right it's a situation that
continues to develop by the day we're
going to have to leave it there for now
Ben fulan thank you so much DW reporter
anchor joining us here to talk about his
uh trip to Israel and some of his
reporting in the aftermath of that
attack and we want to thank you for
watching if you've enjoyed this there's
plenty more from us here on the DW news
YouTube channel until then
thanks